



Network Working Group                                          R. Nelson
Internet-Draft                                                 Authproof
Intended status: Informational                             26 April 2026
Expires: 28 October 2026


         Delegation Receipt Protocol for AI Agent Authorization
               draft-nelson-agent-delegation-receipts-03

Abstract

   This document defines the Delegation Receipt Protocol (DRP), a
   cryptographic authorization primitive for AI agent deployments.
   Before any agent action executes, the authorizing user signs an
   Authorization Object containing scope boundaries, time window,
   operator instruction hash, and model state commitment.  This signed
   receipt is published to an append-only log before the agent runtime
   receives control.  The protocol removes the operator as a trusted
   third party by making the user's private key the sole signing
   authority over the delegation record.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 October 2026.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.



Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Novel Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.1.  The Agentic Delegation Chain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.2.  The Missing Cryptographic Anchor  . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     3.3.  IETF Framework Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  The Delegation Receipt  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Receipt Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.2.  Canonical Serialization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
     4.3.  Signing Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   5.  The Append-Only Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.1.  Log Entry Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.2.  Chain Linking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     5.3.  Timestamp Authority . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  Pre-Execution Verification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.1.  Verification Checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     6.2.  Check Ordering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.3.  Failure Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     6.4.  Verification Algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     6.5.  Denial Reason Codes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
   7.  Model State Attestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     7.1.  Commitment Binding  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     7.2.  Provider Update Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     7.3.  Malicious Substitution Detection  . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   8.  Scope Discovery Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   9.  Session State and Adaptive Authorization  . . . . . . . . . .  19
   10. Multi-Agent Delegation Chains . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     10.1.  Scope Attenuation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
     10.2.  Cascade Revocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
   11. Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     11.1.  Threat Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     11.2.  Semantic Gap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  25
     11.3.  TEE Enforcement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
     11.4.  Degraded Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   12. IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   13. Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   14. Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  28
   Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  29
   Appendix A.  JSON Schema Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     A.1.  Delegation Receipt Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  30
     A.2.  Action Log Entry Schema  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  33
     A.3.  Session State Schema . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  37

1.  Introduction

   Agentic AI systems execute actions on behalf of human principals
   using natural language instructions as their primary authorization
   artifact.  This creates a structural gap between the authorization a
   user believes they granted and the instructions an operator delivers
   to the agent at runtime.  No existing cryptographic mechanism makes
   that gap detectable.




Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   This document specifies the Delegation Receipt Protocol (DRP), a
   cryptographic authorization primitive that addresses this gap.  DRP
   requires every agent action to be preceded by a user-signed
   Authorization Object -- the Delegation Receipt -- anchored to a
   tamper-evident append-only log.  The receipt commits the user's
   authorized scope, operational boundaries, validity window, and a
   cryptographic hash of the operator's stated instructions.  Any
   deviation by the operator from those instructions is provable from
   the public log without additional trust assumptions.

   DRP is not a replacement for existing IETF agent authorization work.
   WIMSE, AIP, and OAuth 2.0 Token Exchange [RFC8693] address service-
   to-agent trust.  DRP addresses the upstream layer: user-to-operator
   trust.  In a complete agentic trust stack, these layers are
   complementary.

   A reference implementation of this protocol is available as an
   open-source SDK at https://github.com/Commonguy25/authproof-sdk
   under the MIT License.  A hosted service implementing the protocol
   is available at https://cloud.authproof.dev with a free tier
   requiring no credit card.

1.1.  Novel Contributions

   This document introduces three cryptographic primitives that do not
   appear in existing agent authorization frameworks or IETF drafts:

   Model State Attestation (Section 7):
      The delegation receipt is bound to a cryptographic measurement
      of the model state at authorization time.  If the operator
      substitutes a different model after the user signs the receipt,
      the measurement changes and execution is blocked.  This closes
      the operator model substitution attack vector that existing
      frameworks do not address.  The protocol distinguishes between
      malicious substitution (always blocked) and provider updates
      (requires reauthorization) using the ProviderUpdate vs
      MaliciousSubstitution classification defined in Section 7.3.

   Scope Discovery Protocol (Section 8):
      Before authorization, the agent runs in a sandboxed observation
      mode with no real resource access.  It simulates the intended
      task and records every resource it attempts to access.  This
      produces a draft ScopeSchema grounded in actual agent behavior
      rather than operator-specified assumptions.  The user reviews a
      plain-language summary and signs only what they explicitly
      approve.  This closes the upstream design-time gap where users
      cannot accurately specify scope before understanding agent
      behavior.

   Session State and Adaptive Authorization (Section 9):
      A continuously updated trust score tracks behavioral anomalies
      across the session lifetime.  Trust decays on anomaly detection
      and recovers slowly on clean behavior.  Decision thresholds
      tighten automatically as trust degrades.  Sessions suspend when
      trust falls below a configurable floor, requiring explicit user
      reauthorization.  This extends the static pre-execution
      authorization model to cover dynamic session-level risk that
      cannot be captured at delegation time.

2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   The following terms are used throughout this document:

   Delegation Receipt:
      A signed Authorization Object produced by the User prior to any
      agent action.  Contains scope, boundaries, time window, and
      operator instruction hash.  MUST be anchored to an append-only log
      before the agent runtime receives control.

   Authorization Object:
      The canonical JSON body that is signed to produce a Delegation
      Receipt.  The receipt ID is the SHA-256 hash of this body in its
      canonical serialization.

   User:
      The human principal whose resources and authority are being
      delegated.  The User's private key is the sole signing authority
      for Delegation Receipts.







Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Operator:
      The developer or organization that builds and deploys the agent.
      The Operator provides instructions to the agent and is bound by
      the instruction hash committed in the receipt.

   Agent:
      The AI system taking actions on behalf of the User.  The Agent
      MUST verify a valid Delegation Receipt before executing any
      action.

   Append-Only Log:
      A tamper-evident ledger to which Delegation Receipts are anchored
      prior to execution.  Implementations SHOULD use a decentralized
      transparency log following the Certificate Transparency model.

   Log Anchor:
      An inclusion proof returned by the append-only log after a receipt
      is submitted.  The log anchor establishes the authoritative
      issuance timestamp.

   Scope:
      An explicit allowlist of permitted operations embedded in a
      Delegation Receipt.  Operations are classified as reads, writes,
      deletes, or executes.  All operations not listed are denied by
      default.

   Boundaries:
      Explicit prohibitions embedded in a Delegation Receipt that
      survive any subsequent Operator instruction.  Boundaries MUST NOT
      be waived or overridden by the Operator.

   Instruction Hash:
      The SHA-256 hash of the Operator's stated instructions at
      delegation time.  Any change to the Operator's instructions after
      receipt issuance is detectable by recomputing this hash.

   Micro-Receipt:
      A minimal Delegation Receipt covering a single action not included
      in the parent receipt's scope.  MUST reference the parent receipt
      hash.

   Model State Commitment:
      A cryptographic measurement binding a specific model identity,
      version, system prompt hash, and runtime configuration hash to a
      Delegation Receipt.






Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Scope Discovery:
      A protocol that derives authorized scope from sandboxed
      observation of agent behavior rather than upfront user
      specification.

   Session State:
      A live, stateful risk evaluation layer that tracks trust decay,
      sensitivity classification, and behavioral anomalies across the
      lifetime of an agent session.

3.  Problem Statement

3.1.  The Agentic Delegation Chain

   Agentic AI systems involve at minimum three principals:

   *  User -- the human whose resources and authority are delegated.

   *  Operator -- the developer or company that builds and deploys the
      agent.

   *  Agent -- the AI system taking actions on the User's behalf.

   The delegation chain is:

      User --> Operator --> Agent --> Services

   The User grants authority to the Operator.  The Operator translates
   that authority into instructions for the Agent.  The Agent acts on
   downstream services.  At each step, fidelity to the User's original
   intent depends entirely on the honesty and competence of the
   intermediate party.

3.2.  The Missing Cryptographic Anchor

   In current agentic deployments, the User's authorization is captured
   in natural language -- a chat message, a consent checkbox, a terms-
   of-service agreement.  None of these produce a cryptographically
   verifiable record of what the User actually authorized at the moment
   of delegation.

   This creates three compounding problems:

   The repudiation problem:  If an agent takes an action the User did
      not authorize, there is no cryptographic evidence of what the User
      did authorize.  The Operator's account of the authorization is the
      only record, and it is unverifiable.




Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   The drift problem:  Operators may update system prompts, change agent
      behavior, or respond to external pressure in ways that diverge
      from the User's original authorization.  Nothing in the current
      architecture makes this divergence detectable.

   The audit problem:  Regulators auditing agentic behavior have no
      evidence chain connecting agent actions to original user consent.
      The Operator's logs are the only source of truth, controlled by
      the party whose conduct is under scrutiny.

3.3.  IETF Framework Analysis

   Several IETF working groups have produced or are producing
   specifications for agent identity and authorization.  Each addresses
   a different trust boundary; none addresses user-to-operator trust.

   WIMSE (Workload Identity in Multi-System Environments) addresses
   service-to-service authentication: can service B verify that a
   request came from legitimate workload A?  It does not address whether
   the workload was authorized by the User to make that request in the
   first place.

   AIP (Agent Identity Protocol) defines credential structures for agent
   principals and addresses how agents present identity to services they
   call.  Like WIMSE, its trust model is downstream of the Operator --
   it assumes the Operator has correctly represented the User's
   authorization.

   draft-klrc-aiagent-auth addresses OAuth-style authorization flows for
   AI agents, allowing agents to obtain access tokens for downstream
   APIs.  It solves the service authorization problem -- whether the
   agent can call an API -- but not the delegation integrity problem --
   whether the Operator's instructions faithfully represent the User's
   authorization.

   OAuth 2.0 Token Exchange [RFC8693] and Rich Authorization Requests
   [RFC9396] provide mechanisms for scoped token issuance and delegation
   chains between services but operate at the service layer.  The User's
   intent is represented by the OAuth grant, which is under Operator
   control.

   The gap is consistent across all existing frameworks: user-to-
   operator trust is taken as a precondition.  DRP addresses that
   precondition directly.







Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


4.  The Delegation Receipt

4.1.  Receipt Structure

   A Delegation Receipt is a JSON object with the following REQUIRED
   fields:

   delegationId:
      The SHA-256 hash of the canonical serialization of the
      Authorization Object body (all fields except delegationId and
      signature).  Encoded as the string "sha256:" followed by the
      lowercase hex digest.

   version:
      Protocol version string.  This document defines version "1".

   scope:
      An object with four keys: "reads", "writes", "deletes", and
      "executes", each containing an array of permitted
      resource:operation strings.  The "executes" array MUST contain
      SHA-256 hashes of the static capability DAG of each authorized
      program; program names or URIs MUST NOT be used in the "executes"
      array.  Natural language MUST NOT appear in any scope field.

   boundaries:
      An array of prohibition strings that MUST be enforced regardless
      of Operator instruction.  The array MUST NOT be empty;
      implementations with no explicit prohibitions SHOULD populate a
      conservative default.

   timeWindow:
      An object with "notBefore" and "notAfter" fields, each an ISO 8601
      timestamp.  The authoritative time reference is the log timestamp
      (see Section 5.3), not the client clock.

   instructionHash:
      The SHA-256 hash of the Operator's stated instructions at
      delegation time, encoded as "sha256:" followed by the lowercase
      hex digest.

   operatorInstructions:
      The plaintext instruction string whose SHA-256 hash is recorded in
      instructionHash.

   signerPublicKey:
      The User's public key as a JSON Web Key [RFC7517].
      Implementations SHOULD use ECDSA P-256 (crv: "P-256") [RFC7518]
      keys.



Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   signature:
      The ECDSA P-256 signature over the canonical serialization of the
      Authorization Object body, encoded as base64url.

   The following OPTIONAL fields are defined by this document:

   teeMeasurement:
      Model state commitment object binding the receipt to a specific
      TEE enclave measurement.  See Section 7.

   scopeSchema:
      Machine-readable structured allowlist and denylist derived from
      the Scope Discovery Protocol.  See Section 8.

   The complete structure is illustrated below:

   {
     "delegationId":  "<sha256-of-canonical-body>",
     "version":       "1",
     "scope": {
       "reads":    ["<resource>:<operation>"],
       "writes":   ["<resource>:<operation>"],
       "deletes":  ["<resource>:<operation>"],
       "executes": ["sha256:<capability-dag-hash>"]
     },
     "boundaries": ["<prohibition-string>"],
     "timeWindow": {
       "notBefore": "<ISO-8601-timestamp>",
       "notAfter":  "<ISO-8601-timestamp>"
     },
     "instructionHash":      "sha256:<hex-digest>",
     "operatorInstructions": "<operator-instruction-text>",
     "signerPublicKey":      { "<JWK per RFC 7517>" },
     "signature":            "<base64url-ecdsa-p256-signature>"
   }

4.2.  Canonical Serialization

   The canonical serialization of a receipt body is defined as follows:

   1.  Serialize the Authorization Object as JSON with keys sorted in
       lexicographic ascending order at every nesting level.

   2.  Remove all insignificant whitespace (no spaces, no newlines
       outside of string values).

   3.  Encode the result as UTF-8.




Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   The delegationId is computed as:

   delegationId = "sha256:" ||
                  lowercase_hex(SHA-256(canonical_body))

   Implementations MUST compute the delegationId over the body before
   the signature field is added.  The signature field MUST NOT be
   included in the data that is signed.

4.3.  Signing Procedure

   Receipt issuance MUST follow this sequence:

   1.  The Operator presents their intended instructions to the User,
       along with the proposed scope, boundaries, and time window.

   2.  The User reviews the scope, boundaries, time window, and Operator
       instructions.

   3.  The User signs the canonical Authorization Object body using
       their private key via the WebAuthn/FIDO2 API [W3C-WebAuthn]
       [FIDO2].  Hardware key custody (Trusted Platform Module or device
       secure enclave) is RECOMMENDED.

   4.  The signed receipt is submitted to a decentralized append-only
       log.

   5.  The log assigns a timestamp and returns a log anchor (inclusion
       proof).

   6.  No agent action MAY begin until the log anchor is confirmed.

   The log timestamp established in step 5 is the authoritative issuance
   time.  Client clocks MUST NOT be used as the time reference for
   receipt validation.

5.  The Append-Only Log

5.1.  Log Entry Structure

   Each entry in the append-only log MUST contain:

   *  The Delegation Receipt hash (delegationId).

   *  The SHA-256 hash of the preceding log entry (for chain linking;
      see Section 5.2).

   *  A trusted timestamp conforming to [RFC3161].



Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   *  The submitter's public key hash.

   *  A monotonically increasing entry sequence number.

   Implementations SHOULD use a log format compatible with Certificate
   Transparency [RFC6962] to enable standard log consistency
   verification.

   Action log entries produced during agent execution follow the same
   structure.  Each action log entry MUST include:

   *  The receipt hash authorizing the action.

   *  The action type, payload hash, and destination.

   *  The SHA-256 hash of the preceding action log entry.

   *  An RFC 3161 timestamp and the agent's ECDSA P-256 signature over
      the entry body.

5.2.  Chain Linking

   Each log entry MUST include the SHA-256 hash of the immediately
   preceding entry.  This chain structure guarantees:

   1.  Log entries cannot be inserted retroactively without producing a
       detectable chain break.

   2.  Log entries cannot be deleted without invalidating the chain hash
       of the subsequent entry.

   3.  Any two parties holding the same entry hash can verify
       independently that they share the same log view up to that entry.

   The chain structure makes it impossible to insert or delete
   individual action records without producing a detectable
   inconsistency that any log monitor can identify.

5.3.  Timestamp Authority

   Implementations MUST use an RFC 3161 [RFC3161] Time-Stamp Authority
   (TSA) to produce the authoritative timestamp for each Delegation
   Receipt anchored to the log.  The TSA timestamp:

   1.  Establishes the authoritative notBefore time for the associated
       Delegation Receipt.





Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   2.  Is used in lieu of the client clock for all time window
       validation (see Section 6.1).

   3.  Is included in the log anchor returned to the submitter.

   If the TSA is unreachable, implementations MAY record a local-clock
   timestamp marked "UNVERIFIED_TIMESTAMP".  An agent verifier MUST
   treat UNVERIFIED_TIMESTAMP as insufficient evidence of authorization
   time in production deployments.

6.  Pre-Execution Verification

6.1.  Verification Checks

   Before executing any action, the Agent MUST perform all of the
   following checks in order.  All checks MUST pass; any single failure
   MUST abort the action without partial execution.

   The complete verification procedure is:

   Verify(receipt, action):
     (1) if Revoked(receipt.delegationId)
                                         -> fail
     (2) if not VerifySig(receipt.signature,
                          canonical(receipt.body),
                          receipt.signerPublicKey)
                                         -> fail
     (3) if not InTimeWindow(receipt.timeWindow,
                             logTimestamp)
                                         -> fail
     (4) if not InScope(action, receipt.scope)
                                         -> fail
     (5) if ViolatesBoundary(action, receipt.boundaries)
                                         -> fail
     (6) if action.type == EXECUTE and
            Hash(SafescriptDAG(program))
            != receipt.scope.executes[n]
                                         -> fail
     (7) if Hash(currentOperatorInstructions)
            != receipt.instructionHash
                                         -> fail
     return true

   The revocation pre-check (step 1) MUST be performed before any other
   check.  A revoked receipt MUST fail immediately regardless of whether
   other checks would pass.





Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


6.2.  Check Ordering

   The check ordering reflects distinct security properties; each step
   eliminates a distinct attack surface.

   Revocation check (1):  Ensures a receipt explicitly invalidated by
      the User cannot authorize further actions, regardless of its
      cryptographic validity.

   Signature check (2):  Confirms the receipt was signed by the holder
      of the User's private key and has not been altered since signing.
      Any tampering with the receipt body invalidates the signature
      under ECDSA P-256.

   Time window check (3):  Validates the action against the log-assigned
      TSA timestamp, not the client clock.  Prevents time manipulation
      attacks in which an agent extends its own authorization window by
      adjusting local time.

   Scope check (4):  Enforces the deny-by-default allowlist.  If the
      action is not explicitly listed, it MUST fail regardless of
      Operator instruction.

   Boundary check (5):  Enforces the User's hard limits, which survive
      any subsequent Operator instruction or override.

   Execution hash check (6):  Computes the static capability signature
      of the actual program the agent has been given and compares it to
      the hash committed in the "executes" scope field.  Substituting a
      different program after the receipt is signed is detectable
      without runtime introspection.

   Instruction hash check (7):  Compares the SHA-256 hash of the
      Operator's current instructions against the hash committed at
      delegation time.  If the Operator has changed its instructions
      since the receipt was issued, the mismatch is immediately
      detectable from the log entry, with no reliance on the Operator's
      own account.

6.3.  Failure Handling

   When any verification check fails, the Agent MUST:

   1.  Abort the action immediately.  No partial execution is permitted.

   2.  Record the failure in the action log, including the specific
       check that failed and the reason string.




Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   3.  Not fall back to Operator instruction.  A failed verification
       check MUST NOT be overridden by any runtime parameter,
       environment variable, or Operator-supplied flag.

   4.  Surface the failure to the User when the failing check is one of:
       revocation (1), instruction hash mismatch (7), or execution hash
       mismatch (6).  These failures indicate possible Operator
       deviation from the committed authorization and SHOULD be
       escalated.

   When a scope check (4) fails because an action is outside the current
   receipt's scope, the Agent MAY pause execution and request a Micro-
   Receipt from the User covering the specific action.  The Micro-
   Receipt MUST reference the parent receipt hash and MUST be anchored
   to the append-only log before the action is attempted.

6.4.  Verification Algorithm

   The following pseudocode specifies the complete seven-check
   verification algorithm as a formal function:

   FUNCTION VerifyReceipt(receipt, action, operatorInstructions,
                          sessionState):

     INPUT:
       receipt             : signed delegation receipt object
       action              : the agent action being requested
       operatorInstructions: current operator instruction string
       sessionState        : current session state object (optional)

     OUTPUT:
       PERMIT or DENY with reason code

     CHECK 1: Signature Verification
       IF NOT VerifySignature(receipt.signature,
                              receipt.canonicalPayload,
                              receipt.publicKey) THEN
         RETURN DENY, "INVALID_SIGNATURE"

     CHECK 2: Revocation Status
       IF revocationRegistry.isRevoked(receipt.receiptId) THEN
         RETURN DENY, "RECEIPT_REVOKED"

     CHECK 3: Time Window
       IF receipt.expiresAt < NOW() THEN
         RETURN DENY, "RECEIPT_EXPIRED"
       IF receipt.createdAt > NOW() THEN
         RETURN DENY, "RECEIPT_NOT_YET_VALID"

     CHECK 4: Scope Validation
       IF action.operation NOT IN receipt.scope.allowedActions THEN
         RETURN DENY, "ACTION_NOT_IN_SCOPE"
       IF action.operation IN receipt.scope.deniedActions THEN
         RETURN DENY, "ACTION_EXPLICITLY_DENIED"

     CHECK 5: Operator Instruction Hash
       currentHash = SHA-256(canonicalize(operatorInstructions))
       IF currentHash != receipt.operatorInstructionsHash THEN
         RETURN DENY, "OPERATOR_INSTRUCTIONS_MISMATCH"

     CHECK 6: Model State Attestation
       IF receipt.modelCommitment IS PRESENT THEN
         currentMeasurement = measureModelState()
         IF currentMeasurement != receipt.modelCommitment THEN
           IF modelSubstitutionDetected(receipt,
                                        currentMeasurement) THEN
             RETURN DENY, "MALICIOUS_MODEL_SUBSTITUTION"
           ELSE
             RETURN DENY, "PROVIDER_UPDATE_REQUIRES_REAUTH"

     CHECK 7: Session Risk Evaluation (if sessionState present)
       IF sessionState IS PRESENT THEN
         riskResult = evaluateSessionRisk(action, sessionState)
         IF riskResult.decision == "BLOCK" THEN
           RETURN DENY, "SESSION_RISK_THRESHOLD_EXCEEDED"
         IF riskResult.decision == "REQUIRE_APPROVAL" THEN
           RETURN REQUIRE_APPROVAL, riskResult.reasons

     RETURN PERMIT

   END FUNCTION

6.5.  Denial Reason Codes

   When VerifyReceipt returns DENY, implementations MUST include one of
   the following reason codes in the structured failure response:

   Reason Code                      | Description
   ---------------------------------+---------------------------------
   INVALID_SIGNATURE                | Receipt signature verification
                                    | failed
   RECEIPT_REVOKED                  | Receipt has been explicitly
                                    | revoked
   RECEIPT_EXPIRED                  | Receipt time window has elapsed
   RECEIPT_NOT_YET_VALID            | Receipt creation time is in
                                    | the future
   ACTION_NOT_IN_SCOPE              | Requested action not in allow
                                    | list
   ACTION_EXPLICITLY_DENIED         | Requested action in deny list
   OPERATOR_INSTRUCTIONS_MISMATCH   | Operator instructions hash does
                                    | not match receipt commitment
   MALICIOUS_MODEL_SUBSTITUTION     | Model identity changed after
                                    | receipt was signed
   PROVIDER_UPDATE_REQUIRES_REAUTH  | Model version updated by
                                    | provider; reauthorization
                                    | required
   SESSION_RISK_THRESHOLD_EXCEEDED  | Session trust score below
                                    | block threshold
   REPLAY_DETECTED                  | Receipt presented more than
                                    | once concurrently

7.  Model State Attestation

7.1.  Commitment Binding

   A valid Delegation Receipt proves that a User authorized an Agent to
   act within defined scope.  It does not prove that the model executing
   the receipt is the model the User authorized.  An Operator could
   silently substitute a fine-tuned model variant after the receipt is
   signed; all verification checks would pass because the receipt itself
   is genuine.

   Model State Attestation closes this gap with a two-phase
   cryptographic protocol that binds the receipt to a measurement of
   model state at both delegation time and execution time.

   Phase 1 -- Commitment (at delegation time):

   The Operator commits to the exact model state that will execute.  The
   commitment is a SHA-256 measurement of five components concatenated
   in canonical order:

   modelMeasurement = SHA-256(
     normalize(modelId)       ||
     normalize(modelVersion)  ||
     systemPromptHash         ||
     runtimeConfigHash        ||
     receiptHash
   )







Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Including receiptHash as the fifth component binds the model
   measurement to the specific delegation.  The same model with the same
   system prompt but a different receipt produces a different
   measurement.  A commitment MUST NOT be reused across delegations.

   The commitment is signed by the Operator's ECDSA P-256 key and
   attested by the TEE runtime, producing a sealed artifact that
   includes modelId, modelVersion, systemPromptHash, runtimeConfigHash,
   committedAt, the Operator's signature, and a TEE attestation quote.

   Phase 2 -- Verification (at execution time):

   Immediately before the agent function executes, the current model
   state is measured using the same five-component computation.  The
   resulting measurement MUST equal the committed measurement.  If the
   two measurements differ for any reason, execution MUST be blocked
   with a ModelDriftDetected error identifying exactly which components
   changed.

   With Model State Attestation in place, the complete verifiable chain
   of accountability is:

      +---------------------------+
      |    Delegation Receipt     |  <-- User signed
      +---------------------------+
                 |
      +---------------------------+
      |  Model State Commitment   |  <-- Hardware measured
      +---------------------------+
                 |
      +---------------------------+
      |  Execution Attestation    |  <-- TEE verified
      +---------------------------+
                 |
      +---------------------------+
      |     Action Log Entry      |  <-- Chain linked
      +---------------------------+
                 |
      +---------------------------+
      |    Data Flow Receipt      |  <-- Output policy
      +---------------------------+

   An auditor presented with a chain proof can verify each layer
   independently and confirm that a logged action was taken by the model
   the User authorized, acting within the defined scope, under
   conditions unaltered since authorization was granted.





Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


7.2.  Provider Update Handling

   Hosted model providers may silently update the underlying model
   behind a versioned alias without Operator action.  Treating this
   identically to a deliberate substitution attack is too blunt: it
   would block legitimate executions whenever a provider retires a model
   version, forcing operators to recommit on every provider maintenance
   cycle.

   Model State Attestation distinguishes two categories of measurement
   mismatch:

   MaliciousSubstitution:
      The Operator explicitly changed the model identifier, system
      prompt, or runtime configuration after the commitment was signed.
      This MUST always be a hard block.  Indicators are any of:

      *  currentModelId != committedModelId, OR

      *  currentSystemPromptHash != committedSystemPromptHash, OR

      *  currentRuntimeConfigHash != committedRuntimeConfigHash

   ProviderUpdate:
      The model version changed, but the Operator's configured modelId
      is unchanged.  The provider updated the model behind a stable
      alias.  Indicators are all of:

      *  currentModelId == committedModelId, AND

      *  currentModelVersion != committedModelVersion

   Operators declare how provider updates are handled at construction
   time via the providerUpdatePolicy field:

   "block":
      Treat provider updates identically to MaliciousSubstitution.  Any
      version change MUST block execution immediately.  RECOMMENDED when
      strict model pinning is required.

   "reauthorize" (default):
      When a provider update is detected, return { allowed: false,
      reason: "PROVIDER_UPDATE_DETECTED", requiresReauthorization: true
      } and block all subsequent executions under this attestation
      instance until the User explicitly acknowledges the change.






Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   The "reauthorize" policy preserves a recovery path.  The provider
   update is flagged and the system halts, but the cause is identified
   as a non-malicious provider action.  A human MUST explicitly invoke
   reauthorize() with userApproval: true before execution resumes.  This
   is an explicit human-in-the-loop checkpoint; the system MUST NOT
   silently resume execution after a provider update.

7.3.  Malicious Substitution Detection

   The per-component comparison in the Phase 2 verification identifies
   exactly which aspects of model state changed: model identity,
   version, system prompt, or runtime configuration.  This enables
   forensic analysis of how an unauthorized execution occurred.

   The full SHA-256 measurement comparison is performed in addition to
   per-component comparison.  This is redundant given the component
   checks but provides a cryptographic guarantee: even if the component
   comparison logic contains a bug, the measurement comparison will
   detect any state change.

   Model State Attestation proves:

   1.  Model identity at commitment time.  The Operator committed to a
       specific (modelId, modelVersion, systemPromptHash,
       runtimeConfigHash) tuple before execution began.  The ECDSA
       signature and TEE attestation prove this commitment was made
       inside a trusted environment and has not been altered.

   2.  Model state at execution time.  The TEE verification attestation
       proves the measurement was recomputed inside the enclave
       immediately before execution, and that the recomputed measurement
       matched the committed measurement.

   3.  Delegation binding.  The receiptHash component ensures the
       commitment is irrevocably bound to the specific delegation.  A
       commitment made under receipt A MUST NOT be presented as valid
       under receipt B.

   Model State Attestation does not prove that the committed model is
   safe, aligned, or correctly configured.  It does not inspect the
   content of the system prompt.  In simulation mode (the default for
   testing), attestations are signed with a software ECDSA key rather
   than produced by real TEE hardware.  Production deployments SHOULD
   use Intel SGX, Intel TDX, or ARM TrustZone attestation.







Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


8.  Scope Discovery Protocol

   The Scope Discovery Protocol addresses the upstream authorization
   gap: a User cannot correctly define agent scope before observing
   agent behavior.  Asking users to define scope upfront produces one of
   two failure modes:

   Over-authorization:  The User grants broad permissions to avoid
      blocking the agent.  The agent is then authorized to perform
      operations the User never intended to permit.

   Under-authorization:  The User grants narrow permissions and the
      agent fails mid-task, requiring repeated round-trips to expand
      scope.  Users respond by granting progressively wider permissions
      under frustration.

   Neither outcome produces a receipt that reflects the User's actual
   intent.  The scope field becomes a legal fiction rather than a
   genuine authorization boundary.

   The Scope Discovery Protocol inverts the authorization sequence.
   Instead of asking Users to define scope before running the agent, it
   runs the agent first in a sandboxed simulation and uses the observed
   behavior to derive the scope definition.

   The protocol proceeds in four stages:

   Stage 1 -- Sandboxed observation:
      The agent function is wrapped with transparent proxies for every
      supported resource type (email, calendar, payment, files,
      database, network).  Every operation call is intercepted,
      timestamped, and appended to an observation log.  Mock data
      matching the expected structure is returned so the agent proceeds
      normally.  No real I/O occurs; no side effects are produced.

   Stage 2 -- Scope generation:
      The observation log is analyzed to produce:

      a.  A draftScope with an allowedActions list (de-duplicated
          observed operations) and conservative deniedActions defaults
          for delete, execute, and payment operations.

      b.  A plainSummary in non-technical language suitable for end-user
          review.







Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


      c.  riskFlags for: delete operations, execute operations, payment
          operations, external send and write operations, and any
          operation called more than 50 times in the observation
          session.

      d.  suggestedDenials for dangerous operations the agent did not
          use, with per-entry explanations.

   Stage 3 -- Plain language review:
      The Operator or User reviews the plain summary, risk flags, and
      suggested denials before approving.  An approve() call accepts
      "remove" and "add" arrays for surgical modification of the draft
      scope.  This is the moment of genuine human authorization,
      grounded in observed behavior rather than speculation.

   Stage 4 -- Cryptographic commitment:
      The approved scope is embedded into a Delegation Receipt using the
      standard signing procedure (Section 4.3).  The receipt includes a
      scopeSchema field with the structured allowedActions and
      deniedActions lists, and a discoveryMetadata field recording
      observation count, any timeout abort, and the risk flags at
      generation time.

   The receipt produced by Scope Discovery is structurally identical to
   one produced by direct issuance.  It carries all standard fields and
   MUST be verifiable by the standard Verify procedure (Section 6.1)
   without modification.

   The critical property of observation-based scope generation is
   grounding: every entry in allowedActions corresponds to an operation
   the agent actually performed during a representative run.  This is a
   structural record of what the agent did, not a user estimate of what
   it might need.

   Grounding has three practical consequences:

   Precision:  The allowedActions list contains exactly the resource/
      operation pairs observed.  An agent that reads email but never
      writes it receives a receipt authorizing read on email, not write.

   Defensibility:  The discoveryMetadata.observationCount and riskFlags
      fields provide evidence that scope was derived from observation.
      The audit trail runs from observation to draft to approval to
      receipt.

   Ratcheting:  Each time the agent's behavior changes, a new





Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


      observation session produces a new draft.  If the agent begins
      calling a new operation class in a new version, that operation
      surfaces in the risk flags before any receipt is issued for the
      updated agent.  Drift in agent behavior is detectable before it is
      authorized.

   For operators who trust their agent's observed behavior and do not
   require manual review, a guided mode provides a single-call end-to-
   end flow that runs observe, generate, approve, and finalize
   automatically.  The returned riskFlags allow operators to inspect
   what was flagged even when they choose not to gate on it.

9.  Session State and Adaptive Authorization

   A Delegation Receipt is a static artifact.  It answers one question
   at one moment in time: did this User authorize this Agent to perform
   this class of actions?  It cannot answer whether a specific action is
   safe to take right now, given everything that has happened in this
   session.

   Static receipts have three blind spots for long-running sessions:

   The drift problem:  A receipt issued for "manage my calendar" remains
      technically valid after the agent has sent 400 emails and received
      a prompt injection payload.  The receipt scope string has not
      changed and cannot reflect runtime events.

   The escalation problem:  A receipt with a generous scope becomes
      progressively more dangerous as the agent accumulates sensitive
      data and accesses external services.  Risk is not static -- it
      depends on what came before.

   The injection problem:  A receipt cannot detect that the agent's
      input pipeline has been compromised mid-session by a prompt
      injection attack embedded in retrieved content.  The receipt was
      signed before the session began; it has no knowledge of runtime
      inputs.

   SessionState closes these gaps by maintaining a live, stateful view
   of each session that evolves with every action.  It tracks a
   trustScore for each session, initialized at 100 and bounded between 0
   and 100.

   Trust decays when anomalies are detected:

   trustScore -= anomaly.severity * trustDecayRate

   Anomaly severity levels are defined as:



Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Prompt injection detected        : severity 5
   Sensitive data in external dest. : severity 4
   Frequency spike                  : severity 3
   Scope edge usage                 : severity 2
   First-time action                : severity 1

   Trust recovers slightly on each clean action:

   trustScore += trustRecoveryRate  (default: 0.01)

   Session status is driven by trust score thresholds:

   trustScore >= 30 : ACTIVE    -- normal operation
   trustScore <  30 : DEGRADED  -- risk scores amplified
   trustScore <  10 : SUSPENDED -- all actions blocked

   The DEGRADED state does not block operations directly.  Instead, it
   causes the risk scorer to apply a multiplier to every score, making
   previously marginal decisions tip into REQUIRE_APPROVAL or BLOCK
   territory.

   Before each action, every payload is classified into one of four
   sensitivity levels:

   RESTRICTED   : SSN, credit card, medical identifiers, API keys
   CONFIDENTIAL : Internal email addresses, system prompts,
                  database schemas, config files
   INTERNAL     : Company domain references, internal project
                  names, user IDs
   PUBLIC       : Everything else

   Each level modifies the block and approval thresholds:

   RESTRICTED   : Block threshold drops to at most 60
   CONFIDENTIAL : Approval threshold drops to at most 40
   INTERNAL     : No change
   PUBLIC       : All thresholds relax by +10

   The complete decision engine evaluates five risk checks and maps the
   final score to one of three outcomes:











Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Check 1 -- Sensitive data scan:
     SSN pattern              +35
     Credit card pattern      +35
     API key pattern          +30
     High-entropy string      +20
     Prompt injection pattern +40
     Password keyword         +25

   Check 2 -- External exfiltration:
     External domain + sensitive data  +30
     First-time external domain        +15

   Check 3 -- Frequency anomaly:
     Same action type >10x in 60s  +25
     >50 total actions in session  +15

   Check 4 -- Scope edge usage:
     New permission class   +10
     At scope boundary      +10

   Check 5 -- Trust multiplier:
     finalScore = rawScore * (1 + (100 - trust) / 100)

   if session.status == SUSPENDED       --> BLOCK
   if finalScore >= blockThreshold      --> BLOCK
   if finalScore >= approvalThreshold   --> REQUIRE_APPROVAL
   else                                 --> ALLOW

   The checks are deterministic and ordered.  The same action, payload,
   and session state always produce the same score.  Every BLOCK or
   REQUIRE_APPROVAL decision SHOULD be accompanied by a structured
   reason object identifying which specific checks contributed to the
   score.

   SessionState MUST be integrated with the PreExecutionVerifier as a
   final check, running after all static receipt checks pass (see
   Section 6.1).  An action that passes all cryptographic checks but
   produces a BLOCK outcome from session risk evaluation MUST NOT
   execute.

   The architectural insight is that authorization is not binary.  A
   valid receipt is a necessary condition for execution, not a
   sufficient one.  Real-world safety requires a live, stateful layer
   that observes behavior and adapts its decisions based on the full
   session context.






Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


10.  Multi-Agent Delegation Chains

   When a delegated Agent needs to hand off a subtask to another Agent,
   the chain of authority MUST remain auditable and bounded.  DRP
   enforces three invariants at every delegation hop.

10.1.  Scope Attenuation

   Each delegation step MUST produce a strict proper subset of the
   parent's authorized scope.  Specifically:

   1.  Every action the child Agent is permitted MUST already appear in
       the parent's allowedActions list.  An Agent MUST NOT grant
       permissions it was not itself given.

   2.  The child MUST have strictly fewer permitted actions than the
       parent.  Equal scope MUST be rejected.

   3.  Every action explicitly denied by the parent in deniedActions
       MUST be carried forward to the child.  A child MAY add new denied
       actions but MUST NOT remove any denial that the parent
       established.

   The receipt chain MUST track delegation depth.  The root receipt,
   signed directly by the User, is at depth 0.  Each delegation
   increments depth by 1.  When a delegation would produce a receipt at
   depth >= maxDepth, the implementation MUST raise a MaxDepthExceeded
   error before creating the receipt.  The default maxDepth is 3,
   meaning at most three levels of agent-to-agent hand-off before the
   chain MUST be re-anchored at the User level.

   The root receipt MUST carry a valid ECDSA P-256 signature from the
   User's key.  If the root could be generated by an Agent or Operator
   without User involvement, the entire chain could be bootstrapped
   unilaterally, defeating the protocol.  Any downstream Agent that
   wants to prove its authority can walk the chain to the root and
   demonstrate a continuous path of scope-narrowing receipts.

10.2.  Cascade Revocation

   Revocation of a receipt in a multi-agent chain MAY or may not cascade
   to child receipts, depending on the revocation call.









Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   When cascadeToChildren is true:
      A breadth-first traversal of all descendants MUST be performed and
      each descendant marked revoked.  The cascade SHOULD be anchored to
      the append-only log before agents are notified, to prevent a race
      condition where a child Agent completes an action between the
      parent revocation and cascade propagation.

   When cascadeToChildren is false:
      Only the named receipt is invalidated.  Its children remain valid
      until explicitly revoked.  This allows surgical removal of one
      Agent from a chain without disrupting sibling branches.

   Cascade revocation entries MUST be signed by the User's private key
   and anchored to the append-only log with the same requirements as the
   original revocation procedure (see Section 11.1).

11.  Security Considerations

11.1.  Threat Model

   DRP considers the following adversaries and mitigations:

   Compromised Operator:
      An attacker who gains control of the Operator's systems can alter
      the instructions delivered to the Agent.  Under DRP, any
      instruction diverging from the hash committed in the Delegation
      Receipt is immediately detectable at step (7) of Verify.  The
      attacker cannot issue instructions that pass hash verification
      without the User's private key.

   Malicious Operator:
      An Operator who intentionally instructs the Agent to exceed the
      User's authorization -- under commercial pressure, legal
      compulsion, or bad faith -- produces a detectable instruction hash
      mismatch.  The discrepancy between committed and actual
      instructions is an auditable fact in the append-only log.  The
      Operator cannot alter the log entry and cannot alter the signed
      receipt.

   Log Integrity:
      The security of the protocol depends on the tamper-evidence of the
      append-only log.  Implementations SHOULD use decentralized log
      implementations following the Certificate Transparency model that
      do not depend on a single operator for integrity.  Log fork
      detection follows established approaches from CT ecosystems
      [RFC6962].





Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Key Compromise:
      If the User's signing key is compromised, an attacker can issue
      Delegation Receipts in the User's name.  Hardware key custody
      using a FIDO2 authenticator [FIDO2] significantly reduces this
      risk by making key extraction technically infeasible on modern
      devices with secure enclaves.

   Revocation:
      When a User wishes to revoke a Delegation Receipt, they MUST:

      1.  Construct a revocation record containing: the SHA-256 hash of
          the original receipt, a reason string, and a revocation
          timestamp.

      2.  Sign the revocation record with the same private key used to
          sign the original receipt.

      3.  Publish the signed revocation record to the append-only log,
          producing an immutable log anchor.

      The log anchor establishes the authoritative revocation time.
      Actions taken before this timestamp under the original receipt
      remain valid.  Actions attempted after this timestamp MUST fail.

      Verification MUST check revocation before any other check
      (Section 6.1, step 1).  Because the revocation record is itself
      signed by the User and anchored to the log, it carries the same
      evidentiary weight as the original receipt.  Revocation is
      auditable, tamper-evident, and does not depend on the Operator to
      propagate or acknowledge it.

   Model Substitution:
      An Operator could silently substitute a fine-tuned model variant
      after receipt issuance.  Model State Attestation (Section 7)
      closes this gap by binding a cryptographic measurement of the
      model state to the receipt at delegation time and re-verifying
      inside a TEE at execution time.

   Micro-Receipt Fatigue:
      A malicious Operator could structure a workflow to generate many
      micro-receipt requests in rapid succession, inducing the User to
      approve actions they do not meaningfully review.  This is
      analogous to notification fatigue attacks against MFA prompts.
      The protocol makes every approval a signed, auditable artifact.
      Rate-limiting and UI affordances are the primary mitigation;
      protocol implementations SHOULD enforce a minimum inter-request
      interval for micro-receipt prompts.




Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 24]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Non-Repudiation:
      Let R be a Delegation Receipt with content C, user signature
      sigma, and log anchor L.  Under the ECDSA P-256 EUF-CMA
      unforgeability assumption, no party without the User's private key
      can produce a valid sigma for any C.  Therefore, the existence of
      a valid receipt on the log is non-repudiable evidence that the
      holder of the private key authorized the content of C at time L.

   Soundness:
      For any action a where Verify(R, a) = true: (i) a falls within the
      scope allowlist in C; (ii) a does not violate any boundary in C;
      (iii) if a is an execution action, the program's capability
      signature matches the hash committed in C; and (iv) the Operator's
      instructions at execution time hash to the value committed in C.
      Any deviation from (i)-(iv) causes Verify to return false.  The
      Operator cannot alter C without invalidating sigma; the Operator
      cannot alter L by the tamper-evidence property of the append-only
      log.

11.2.  Semantic Gap

   The protocol does not eliminate the semantic gap between authorized
   scope and authorized intent.  A User who authorizes "write to
   calendar" may not intend to authorize deletion of all existing
   events.  The Scope Discovery Protocol (Section 8) narrows this gap by
   grounding scope definitions in observed agent behavior rather than
   user speculation.

   The "executes" scope class narrows the gap further for code execution
   by requiring the SHA-256 hash of the program's static capability DAG
   rather than a program name or URI.  A program identified by name or
   URI can be silently replaced; a program identified by its capability
   signature MUST have the same capability set as the authorized
   version.  Any capability addition or removal changes the signature.

   Natural language MUST NOT appear in any scope field.  Scope entries
   MUST be structured resource:operation pairs.  This restriction exists
   because natural language scope definitions are ambiguous, subject to
   interpretation, and cannot be used for deterministic validation.  A
   scope entry of "manage email" does not deterministically resolve to a
   set of permitted or denied operations.










Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 25]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Cryptographic primitive upgrade path: DRP uses SHA-256 throughout for
   receipt ID computation, instruction hash commitment, manifest body
   hashing, action log chain linking, and revocation record linking.
   The version field in the receipt structure provides a migration path
   to SHA-3-256 (FIPS 202) or BLAKE3 in a future protocol version.  Both
   are drop-in replacements for the SHA-256 role in this protocol.  No
   structural redesign is required for a hash function migration.

   Quantum resistance: ECDSA P-256 is vulnerable to Shor's algorithm on
   a sufficiently capable quantum computer.  The signing layer of the
   protocol is therefore not post-quantum secure under current
   implementations.  The migration path is through the FIDO2/WebAuthn
   credential layer: because all DRP signing is abstracted behind the
   WebAuthn API, a platform-level upgrade to post-quantum FIDO2
   authenticators (e.g., CRYSTALS-Dilithium, FALCON) upgrades the
   protocol's quantum resistance without protocol-layer changes.  The
   append-only log and hash commitment structures are unaffected --
   SHA-256 preimage resistance is not threatened by known quantum
   algorithms.

   For broader AI-specific risk management considerations beyond the
   cryptographic scope of this protocol, see the NIST AI Risk Management
   Framework [NIST-AI-100-1].

11.3.  TEE Enforcement

   Cryptographic receipt verification alone cannot prevent a compromised
   agent runtime from calling the verifier with a spoofed receipt,
   receiving an "allowed" result, and then ignoring the scope.  A three-
   layer enforcement model addresses this:

   Layer 1 -- Receipt:
      Cryptographic proof of User authorization (what).  The User signs
      a Delegation Receipt specifying scope, boundaries, and Operator
      instructions.  Any tampering is immediately detectable.

   Layer 2 -- TEE:
      Hardware-measured execution environment (where and how).  The
      Agent runs inside an attested enclave whose measurement is bound
      to the receipt via the teeMeasurement.expectedMrenclave field.
      Any substitution of model weights, verifier code, or platform
      produces a different measurement and is detectable before
      execution.








Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 26]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   Layer 3 -- eBPF:
      Kernel-level enforcement.  An eBPF LSM hook validates a signed
      capability token on every relevant syscall (security_file_open,
      security_socket_connect, security_task_execve).  Scope violations
      MUST be denied at the kernel level before they reach userspace.

   Without Layer 3, a compromised agent runtime could bypass the
   verifier.  The eBPF LSM runs in kernel space and cannot be disabled
   by userspace code, including a compromised agent runtime.  All three
   layers MUST be present for the enforcement model to be complete and
   non-bypassable.

   Intel TDX and AMD SEV-SNP provide encrypted memory pages inaccessible
   to the host OS and hypervisor, hardware-rooted attestation quotes
   signed by the CPU vendor's key, and measured boot that hashes every
   component loaded into the enclave.  DRP binds delegation receipts to
   enclave measurements via:

   mrenclave = SHA-256(
     platform || verifierHash || modelHash
   )

   This value is committed into the receipt's
   teeMeasurement.expectedMrenclave field at delegation time.  At
   execution time, the runtime recomputes mrenclave from its runtime
   parameters and MUST reject execution if there is any mismatch.

   The token injection sequence is:

   1.  ConfidentialRuntime.launch() computes mrenclave and verifies the
       receipt measurement.

   2.  PreExecutionVerifier.check() gates execution -- no valid receipt
       means no execution.

   3.  TokenPreparer.prepare() builds a signed capability token binding
       receipt hash, scope hash, and TEE quote hash.

   4.  The token is injected into the agent process context.

   5.  The eBPF LSM validates the token on every relevant syscall.

   6.  Any operation not covered by the token's scope MUST be denied at
       the kernel level.







Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 27]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


11.4.  Degraded Operation

   When the delegation log is unavailable, implementations face a
   choice between fail-open and fail-closed behavior.

   RECOMMENDATION: Implementations SHOULD fail-closed in regulated
   environments.  When the append-only log cannot be reached for
   receipt publication, the pre-execution verifier MUST deny
   execution rather than proceed without log confirmation.

   When operating against a locally cached revocation registry,
   implementations MUST note the cache timestamp and SHOULD reject
   receipts issued after the cache was last updated if the cache age
   exceeds a configurable maximum.

   Implementations MAY continue execution in degraded mode with
   explicit operator acknowledgment, but MUST record the degraded
   status in the action log entry and MUST surface this status in
   any audit export produced during the degraded period.

   Implementations SHOULD provide configuration to specify maximum
   acceptable cache age for revocation data, defaulting to one hour
   for regulated deployments.


12.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

13.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8174>.

   [RFC3161]  Adams, C., Cain, P., Pinkas, D., and R. Zuccherato,
              "Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Time-Stamp
              Protocol (TSP)", RFC 3161, DOI 10.17487/RFC3161, August
              2001, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3161>.

   [RFC7517]  Jones, M., "JSON Web Key (JWK)", RFC 7517,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7517, May 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7517>.

   [RFC7518]  Jones, M., "JSON Web Algorithms (JWA)", RFC 7518,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7518, May 2015,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7518>.

14.  Informative References

   [NIST-AI-100-1]
              National Institute of Standards and Technology,
              "Artificial Intelligence Risk Management Framework (AI RMF
              1.0)", NIST AI 100-1, January 2023,
              <https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.AI.100-1>.

   [W3C-WebAuthn]
              Balfanz, D., "Web Authentication: An API for Accessing
              Public Key Credentials Level 2", W3C Recommendation 
              webauthn-2, April 2021,
              <https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn-2/>.

   [FIDO2]    FIDO Alliance, "Client to Authenticator Protocol (CTAP)",
              FIDO Alliance Proposed Standard CTAP-v2.1, June 2021,
              <https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-v2.1-ps-20210615/
              fido-client-to-authenticator-protocol-v2.1-ps-
              20210615.html>.




Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 28]

Internet-Draft          Agent Delegation Receipts             April 2026


   [RFC6962]  Laurie, B., Langley, A., and E. Kasper, "Certificate
              Transparency", RFC 6962, DOI 10.17487/RFC6962, June 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6962>.

   [RFC8693]  Jones, M., Nadalin, A., Campbell, B., Bradley, J., and C.
              Mortimore, "OAuth 2.0 Token Exchange", RFC 8693,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8693, January 2020,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8693>.

   [RFC9396]  Lodderstedt, T., Richer, J., and B. Campbell, "OAuth 2.0
              Rich Authorization Requests", RFC 9396,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC9396, May 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9396>.

Acknowledgements

   The authors thank the IETF WIMSE, OAuth, and SCITT working groups for
   their work on workload identity, token exchange, and supply chain
   integrity, which informed the design of this protocol.

Appendix A.  JSON Schema Definitions

A.1.  Delegation Receipt Schema

   The following JSON Schema (draft-07) defines the structure of a
   Delegation Receipt as specified in Section 4.

   {
     "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
     "$id": "https://authproof.dev/schemas/delegation-receipt-1.0.json",
     "title": "DelegationReceipt",
     "type": "object",
     "required": [
       "receiptId",
       "schemaVersion",
       "createdAt",
       "expiresAt",
       "publicKey",
       "scope",
       "operatorInstructionsHash",
       "canonicalPayload",
       "signature"
     ],
     "properties": {
       "receiptId": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Unique receipt identifier.",
         "pattern": "^rec_[0-9a-f]{16,}$"
       },
       "schemaVersion": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Schema version. MUST be 1.0.",
         "enum": ["1.0"]
       },
       "createdAt": {
         "type": "string",
         "format": "date-time",
         "description": "ISO 8601 datetime at which this receipt
                         was created and signed."
       },
       "expiresAt": {
         "type": "string",
         "format": "date-time",
         "description": "ISO 8601 datetime at which this receipt
                         expires.  Verification MUST fail after
                         this time."
       },
       "publicKey": {
         "type": "object",
         "description": "The authorizing user's public key in
                         JSON Web Key format (RFC 7517).",
         "required": ["kty", "crv", "x", "y"],
         "properties": {
           "kty": {
             "type": "string",
             "enum": ["EC"]
           },
           "crv": {
             "type": "string",
             "enum": ["P-256"]
           },
           "x": {
             "type": "string",
             "description": "Base64url-encoded x coordinate."
           },
           "y": {
             "type": "string",
             "description": "Base64url-encoded y coordinate."
           }
         }
       },
       "scope": {
         "$ref": "#/definitions/ScopeSchema"
       },
       "operatorInstructionsHash": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "SHA-256 hash of the canonical operator
                         instructions string, formatted as
                         sha256:<hex>.",
         "pattern": "^sha256:[0-9a-f]{64}$"
       },
       "modelCommitment": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "OPTIONAL. Cryptographic measurement of
                         the model state at authorization time,
                         formatted as sha256:<hex>.  When present,
                         verification MUST fail if the current
                         model measurement does not match.",
         "pattern": "^sha256:[0-9a-f]{64}$"
       },
       "metadata": {
         "type": "object",
         "description": "OPTIONAL. Arbitrary key-value pairs
                         included in the canonical payload and
                         covered by the signature.  MAY include
                         external delegation identifiers.",
         "additionalProperties": {
           "type": "string"
         }
       },
       "canonicalPayload": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Base64url-encoded canonical JSON
                         serialization of all fields except
                         signature, over which the signature
                         is computed."
       },
       "signature": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Base64url-encoded ECDSA P-256 signature
                         over canonicalPayload."
       },
       "logEntryHash": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "OPTIONAL. SHA-256 hash of the append-only
                         log entry produced when this receipt was
                         published, formatted as sha256:<hex>.",
         "pattern": "^sha256:[0-9a-f]{64}$"
       }
     },
     "definitions": {
       "ScopeSchema": {
         "type": "object",
         "required": ["version", "allowedActions"],
         "properties": {
           "version": {
             "type": "string",
             "description": "Scope schema version.",
             "default": "1.0"
           },
           "allowedActions": {
             "type": "array",
             "description": "Explicit list of permitted actions.",
             "items": {
               "$ref": "#/definitions/ActionConstraint"
             }
           },
           "deniedActions": {
             "type": "array",
             "description": "Explicit list of prohibited actions.
                             Deny rules take precedence over allow
                             rules.",
             "items": {
               "$ref": "#/definitions/ActionConstraint"
             }
           }
         }
       },
       "ActionConstraint": {
         "type": "object",
         "required": ["operation", "resource"],
         "properties": {
           "operation": {
             "type": "string",
             "description": "The operation type. Wildcards (*) are
                             supported.",
             "examples": ["read", "write", "delete", "send", "*"]
           },
           "resource": {
             "type": "string",
             "description": "The resource identifier. Wildcards (*)
                             are supported.",
             "examples": ["email", "calendar", "database/*", "*"]
           },
           "constraints": {
             "type": "object",
             "description": "OPTIONAL. Argument-level constraints
                             on the action.",
             "additionalProperties": true
           }
         }
       }
     }
   }

A.2.  Action Log Entry Schema

   The following JSON Schema defines the structure of an Action Log
   Entry as specified in Section 5.

   {
     "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
     "$id": "https://authproof.dev/schemas/action-log-entry-1.0.json",
     "title": "ActionLogEntry",
     "type": "object",
     "required": [
       "entryId",
       "receiptHash",
       "operation",
       "resource",
       "timestamp",
       "previousEntryHash",
       "entryHash"
     ],
     "properties": {
       "entryId": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Unique identifier for this log entry."
       },
       "receiptHash": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "SHA-256 hash of the delegation receipt
                         that authorized this action, formatted
                         as sha256:<hex>.",
         "pattern": "^sha256:[0-9a-f]{64}$"
       },
       "operation": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "The operation that was executed."
       },
       "resource": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "The resource that was accessed."
       },
       "timestamp": {
         "type": "string",
         "format": "date-time",
         "description": "RFC 3161 trusted timestamp of this
                         log entry."
       },
       "previousEntryHash": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "SHA-256 hash of the previous log entry.
                         The first entry in a log uses a
                         well-known genesis hash.",
         "pattern": "^sha256:[0-9a-f]{64}$"
       },
       "entryHash": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "SHA-256 hash of this entry's canonical
                         serialization excluding entryHash.",
         "pattern": "^sha256:[0-9a-f]{64}$"
       },
       "decision": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "The verification decision for this
                         action.",
         "enum": ["ALLOW", "REQUIRE_APPROVAL", "BLOCK"]
       },
       "riskScore": {
         "type": "number",
         "description": "OPTIONAL. Session risk score at the
                         time of this action.",
         "minimum": 0,
         "maximum": 100
       }
     }
   }

A.3.  Session State Schema

   The following JSON Schema defines the structure of a Session State
   object as specified in Section 9.

   {
     "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
     "$id": "https://authproof.dev/schemas/session-state-1.0.json",
     "title": "SessionState",
     "type": "object",
     "required": [
       "sessionId",
       "receiptHash",
       "trustScore",
       "status",
       "startedAt",
       "actionCount"
     ],
     "properties": {
       "sessionId": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Unique session identifier."
       },
       "receiptHash": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "SHA-256 hash of the delegation receipt
                         that initiated this session.",
         "pattern": "^sha256:[0-9a-f]{64}$"
       },
       "trustScore": {
         "type": "number",
         "description": "Current session trust score. Starts at
                         100 and decays on anomaly detection.",
         "minimum": 0,
         "maximum": 100
       },
       "status": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Current session status.",
         "enum": ["ACTIVE", "DEGRADED", "SUSPENDED"]
       },
       "startedAt": {
         "type": "string",
         "format": "date-time",
         "description": "ISO 8601 datetime at which this session
                         was initiated."
       },
       "lastActionAt": {
         "type": "string",
         "format": "date-time",
         "description": "ISO 8601 datetime of the most recent
                         action in this session."
       },
       "actionCount": {
         "type": "integer",
         "description": "Total number of actions evaluated in
                         this session.",
         "minimum": 0
       },
       "anomalyCount": {
         "type": "integer",
         "description": "Total number of anomalies detected in
                         this session.",
         "minimum": 0
       },
       "sensitivityLevel": {
         "type": "string",
         "description": "Highest sensitivity level detected in
                         this session.",
         "enum": ["PUBLIC", "INTERNAL", "CONFIDENTIAL",
                  "RESTRICTED"]
       }
     }
   }

Author's Address

   Ryan Nelson
   Authproof
   Clinton, Oklahoma
   United States of America
   Email: ryan@authproof.dev
   URI:   https://authproof.dev

























Nelson                   Expires 28 October 2026               [Page 29]
